You are listening to radio lab radio from W N Y.
S. Yup. Hey,
I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich. This is radio lab. And today, uh,
we're gonna, uh, we're gonna feature a story from our friends over at reply all,
which is a podcast produced by gimlet media hosted by PJ Vogt, Alex Goldman.
We're gonna let you hear a taste of reply all. You know,
cause it's an amazing show. Every, the entire staff's like secret,
favorite show, not even secret actually. And this story, uh,
it just kinda grabbed us now. They,
we're not gonna play you the whole story that they did.
We're gonna play you most of it and we may intervene from time to time just to
sort of, cause we, we bubble over with questions. Exactly. And this,
this story actually doesn't come from PJ and Alex. It comes from uh,
one of their producers. Shoot DP them on any yes.
And the story sort of centers around a couple and their son.
So let me start by introducing you to the couple. Amy Green
and Ryan Green. Hello. We have our buffalo chicken. Oh wait,
you got hoppings from yesterday?
No, I already ate those. I think that's why I'm suffering this morning.
They live in a small house in Loveland, Colorado.
They fell in love chatting online, got married. As soon as he turned 21,
they moved into this house the very next day. Oh. Um,
let me respond to some emails and then we'll head down.
They had their first son, Caleb, their second son, Isaac. Um,
Ryan was a computer programmer and Amy took care of the kids.
They were just living in a mess of diapers and toys,
going to church every Sunday.
And then
in 2009, they had Joel
when Joel was born. How old were you? Um, I, gosh,
I was thinking about this the other day.
If I was 25 when Kayla was born and then when Isaac was born,
I would have been like 27. Yeah, I think I was 28. I was 2,800 was born.
[inaudible] have figured it out. Everything was normal. Fine.
And then just a little before his first birthday,
Amy noticed that his head was a little tilted,
just kinda cocked to one side. A couple days later he starts throwing up,
can't keep any food down.
And so they do a bunch of tests and the doctor says, listen,
your son has a lesion to cancer.
So they biopsy the tumor and then they come back with this news that it's
something called an ATR t. It's very, very difficult to treat.
So when you have an ATR t you go through all the most intense chemotherapy and
all the most intense radiation,
they throw the kitchen sink at it and doing that you have about a 50% chance of
surviving for five years.
I double check this and it turns out the odds of survival or even grimmer,
it's a 50% chance of surviving just two years.
When you, when you hear it, this kind of news,
is there any part of you that's like, what if you don't do the treatment?
I remember before his first surgery,
asking them a lot about like really have to have chemotherapy and thinking to
myself, cause I can't, we can't, we can't do this. This is crazy.
We can't do this.
But then as time wore on and by the time we actually even heard about the,
the tumor, then you're just thinking like, oh well 50% like that's half.
Like we've got a good shot that he gets through this.
What do you think Isaac? He's, he's in the hospital,
so they're taking care of him.
Well this is from a home video of Joel's brothers meeting him in the hospital.
Isaac is two-and-a-half looking kind of scared.
Joel is a little over a year old.
He's lying in a small red wagon hooked up to an IB.
He's skinny and his head is perfectly round. Yeah,
this is food is food goes to that too. Yeah.
So they start going through this treatment.
It starts off with intense radiation and then just, you know,
months of chemotherapy, which I didn't know what that meant.
It means that you just hold the baby for six, seven, eight hours a day.
And you just lie in a bed with them while they get [inaudible]
these infusions. Um,
and so it'd be like this eight hour pump and you'd hook it up at night and it
would be this like this, a white milky substance, uh,
that would provide all of his nutrition because he couldn't swallow very well.
One day it was Amy's shift. She was holding Joel,
I was sitting in his, um,
room with him and I was singing him a song and clapping and he was clapping his
hands and then he was sort of like Babel singing along.
And so like for me it was just one of those moments that you felt like, oh,
I'm always going to remember this.
Like sometimes you just have a moment and you go,
I'm going to remember this the rest of my life.
And then that made me sad because I thought, oh, like,
but the reason I think I'll remember this the rest of my life is because he
could die. Um,
until eventually I did just kind of decide like, I think I need to be all in.
Like I think I need to love him.
Like mad and I think that we need to live our lives like he's going to live.
And that's what they did for a year.
And then in November, 2010 just before Joel second birthday,
the doctors call them in and they say we're really sorry,
Joel has another tumor. All these chemicals we've been pumping into him,
they didn't do anything. And so it's time for us to stop.
He will eventually die. We're not sure, but we think in about four months,
um, you know, this is it. But as shooting goes on to explain in the story,
that definitely wasn't it.
Cause there's this one night when the situation was pretty much had its worst
when something happened. Joel had a stomach bug, he was throwing up,
got dehydrated. So Ryan spent the night with him in the hospital.
I just remember him,
him really wanting apple juice cause that was one of his favorite things at the
hospital. But then I'd give it to him and he just throw it up again
and he's crying and crying and his cries just get more frantic and animal.
And there's nothing that Ryan can do by the end of the night. Just sunken eyes.
But I just remember like I wanted to hold him and I couldn't put him down
because he would get so upset. And, and when Brian finally did put him down,
Joel would start hitting his head against the wall of his crib.
Eventually Ryan himself started to lose it. He was crying too.
And then in the early hours of the morning, you lay down
and prayed. And I remember that's when he stopped crying and he fell asleep
and it was just one of those,
it's one of those few moments in life where like,
it felt like an answer from God. And um,
it wasn't like I heard a voice or saw, you know,
a burning Bush or anything like that, but it was just,
it felt so much like mercy
and beyond just sheer relief. Ryan had this other thought, frankly,
a weird thought. This whole ordeal reminded him of a video game.
Like you have to get the baby to stop crying. So you keep trying things,
give him juice, bounce him, talk to him.
But the weird thing is in this awful game, none of those things actually work.
They're all like fake choices. Brian Thought,
what if I could make a game like this where you the player you don't really have
control. And so he started [inaudible].
I think like I wonder if I could make that I f I, if I could make that scene,
if he could make the scene of Joel in desperation and then give him an option.
Is that the thing is, is there a act of saving? No, no, no.
So he's going to make a video game where everything you do doesn't work.
The baby's still Christ. Yeah.
I think he was just intrigued by that because it seemed bizarre. Yeah.
I'll make a video game where you can't do anything except pray.
You has a very high likelihood of being a popular game.
I think the popularity of it was so not essential.
He wasn't even thinking that cause he wasn't thinking,
Oh this is the game that I will release.
It was almost like a thought experiment right in his brain where he's thinking,
you know, usually people come into a game. I'm trying to solve it.
And I wonder how, if I could make this game where they couldn't,
they would understand me. I how I feel right now. Uh,
I remember he really, he was like,
I want to make a game about that day that Joel was dehydrated in the hospital
and I said, that's terrible. That's not a game.
And no one will want to play that.
Like you think that that word game meant like something you do in your leisure
time, you know?
And so who wants to spend their leisure time reliving the worst moment of a
man's life? So I said, do not make that. That is horrible bait.
He caught him to the idea. So finally Amy said, okay,
I'll give you three months.
Thank you. So a few months later,
it's the game developers conference in San Francisco alongside assassin's creed
three battlefield for the new oculus rift VR headset.
Okay. Hi everybody. My name is Brian. There was Ryan.
I'm going to talk to you about a personal game that I am making. My son,
Joel had just turned one year old that day that we found the monster in his
brain standing in front of a bunch of young tech dudes.
They're listening. Diddly Joel is alive and fighting his eighth tumor.
Our doctors fight for him, our family fights for him and we serve a god.
That's the god of the living,
not the dead in the middle of all this pain and suffering and mud and morass
that cancer is rot in our family.
We have a drink of water that's made of hope and love, enlightened.
We hope to share it with
Amy,
stayed home fretting because they were almost out of money and she was worried
that Ryan would come home feeling crushed,
but that's not what happened. Ryan got back and said
it was amazing. This person introduced me to that person.
That person is just in that one.
There's two or three different people who want to fund my game. Wait,
so you're seeing this axiom
market for a game like this, so,
so I want to be clear that the world of these kinds of emotional games,
it's a small one, right? But there are people there,
investors in there who are looking for games that are doing something different,
looking for games that are meaningful in some way. Um,
and so I think a few of them played through the scene, this dehydration scene,
and they thought, okay, let's,
let's like see what a full fledged version of this would be. Um,
and we're just, you know, there's,
it's like the video game generation has grown up, right?
Like if you were born in the eighties or the seventies,
like you played games for certain reasons when you're a kid and now we're grown
up and we're having these different experiences like a child going through
cancer or you know, the death of my father or these things,
which suddenly you're like, why can't I tell these stories with video games?
And what was Amy's reaction when she heard people wanting to fund the game?
It really blew my mind because I'm still just like,
because of your dehydration game that I told you to never make,
and he realizes like, you've never played it.
Like you've never played the scene. So I put on the headphones
and she finds herself back in the hospital room.
You don't see Joel, you see an empty crib and you can hear him crying.
You're playing as Ryan.
You can move your mouse around the screen and options appear.
You can give him juice, you can try to bounce him.
You can walk into the bathroom, look at the window.
But no matter what you do, he's crying. Just gets worse and worse.
After five or six minutes of this, Brian sits in a chair,
drops his head into his lap and craze. Oh
yeah. And then with you,
the crying stops. [inaudible]
so I put on the headphones
and I just lost it and I was just crying and crying and I knew Joel was okay and
he was like right there. Like Joel was right there with us. And,
and yet it brought me back to that space and I much more real way than I thought
that a video game could
[inaudible]
Amy didn't need any more convincing. She said, okay, let's do this.
Let's pull the rest of our savings and make this game.
[inaudible].
They named it that dragon cancer
I'm just going to use the same tease that reply all use in their podcasts coming
up, Ryan and Amy encounter what might be the world's biggest design problem.
[inaudible]
this is Riley Lawrence from Woodland Hills, California.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by Sophie by a new kind of finance company.
Did you know that student loan refinancing is a great way to accomplish more
with less student debt? If you worked hard to get the career you want,
Sophie is here to offer savings.
Sophie refinancing student loans to save its members $316 a month on average.
Learn more@sofidotcomtermsandconditionsapplyatsofi.com slash legal
hi, I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Google and Squarespace.
Make your business official with Google and Squarespace.
When you create a custom domain and a beautiful business website with
Squarespace, you'll receive a free year of business,
email and professional tools from Google.
It's the simplest way to look professional online.
Visit squarespace.com/google to start your free trial.
Use the offer code document for 10% off on your purchase. Google
and Squarespace. Make it professional. Make it beautiful.
Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich, Radiolab and we are back with again,
reply all story. It's about a couple who have a kid who's who's fighting cancer,
and the mom and dad have decided to express the experiences that they're going
through in of all things of video game. Yeah,
so Amy and Ryan and their six person team,
they begin to build these scenes of the game,
these surreal vignettes where you the player you take on different characters
and every scene, your job,
your role basically is to kind of take care of baby Joel.
So let's now go back to the piece and to Cerruti.
The first scene is at the pond. You start off as a doc,
you paddled towards a little boy. It's Joel or this Origami version of him.
He doesn't have eyes or a mouth,
but he has a voice and that is actually Joel's laugh as you hand him pieces of
bread and he throws them into the water.
[inaudible] you try to it over those five life. Yeah.
The kids speaking here as Isaac Joel's brother,
but she can't talk. That's true. Yeah.
You can talk. Yeah, no,
it's all well, Joe got sick right after he turned one.
Kind of slowed him down a little bit, buddy.
And there's other vignettes like there was this one time in a hospital when to
keep Joel entertained. Ryan blew up surgical gloves, like balloons.
It's this gorgeous scene where you see Joel floating into the nighttime sky,
towards the moon, holding onto these surgical bleedings
and then you see these black birds appear from the corner. Wow.
That's the cancer. And it popped the balloons one by one.
And throughout these scenes, you play many games. You discover rooms,
listen to voicemails from Amy. There's even little levels you can beat.
But the cancer is always around the edges of this world thorny and black and
creeping in.
[inaudible]
and at one point you'll arrive here.
The waiting room were doctors tell Amy and Ryan that Joel's cancer is terminal.
As they break the news,
rain starts pouring into the room and Ryan slowly starts to slip under the
water.
We've given you a lot to think about already today.
We're going to have you come back on Monday and we can talk about palliative
treatment.
[inaudible] care
managing.
Just to jump in for one second, uh, we asked through t,
so as Ryan and Amy and the team were crafting these scenes,
what was happening with Joel? And she says, what happened?
Surprised everybody thing that happened was that tumor where, you know,
the doctor said, listen, he's terminal. It's going to be over soon.
They radiate the tumor and it goes away.
And then a few months later he gets another tumor.
They radiate and it goes away. And then this happens again and again and again.
And so he's two years old. He's three years old, he's four years old.
He's doing things that the doctors never thought he would do. Like he,
he turned two and a half and said his first word. Oh No, Nah.
He starts to swallow again. Show, don't check.
The food starts to walk when he's three
he just became this miracle baby.
Somebody in their church said they had a vision.
A woman in the church told her that she had a vision that Joel would do great
things.
[inaudible]
another reason they wanted to make this about Joel is because they felt as if,
you know, as Christians,
they were living a miracle and they wanted to share this with people and show
them
and then a doctor calls them in and he says, listen,
Joel has a new tumor, but this tumor is different.
It's in a place that we've already radiated.
He explained to us that the cannot continue to radiate an area too much or it
can cause a brain death and it was right on the brainstem.
The doctors say, we're not going to radiate this time,
and what happened to Joel, his condition like very rapidly deteriorated.
He was having more trouble breathing. He can't swallow again.
A lot of the things that he was able to do like walk and eat, he's,
he stops and so
[inaudible]
they invite their entire church community to come to their house and pray.
We had a prayer night just praying for him to be healed and we just had everyone
over and we spent hours just worshiping and praying.
There's video footage of this night. It's in their small living room.
There's family members, friends, people from their church community.
Ryan is holding Joel and they're praying,
oh, we have his death here on this earth. That's all we have.
The only hope we have is your resurrection gone.
So why would the hope hurt us? All I have is my disappointment.
That's what I start with.
Wow.
But I hope that that you filled my disappointment that you make it right,
that you redeem it pink. You got it
blind. Who See? And it's the deaf here and again,
I've got, I believe you do all of them.
[inaudible] my child.
[inaudible] [inaudible]
what's your strongest memory from
that night?
I think it's just realizing that he was going
did have that thing
[inaudible]
it's that space of being with a bunch of people that desperately want the same
thing that you will and are crying out for that grace and that mercy to kind of
invade a situation.
Joel died later that night. It was march 13, 2014 I feel like in a way,
because we were believing that he would be healed and because we were believing
that even if he died, maybe he'd be raised from the dead. Like,
which is why all the new settle after. But that your story,
cause it's weird and I still get that. It's weird. Um,
but because we still believed that she could live,
I feel like we didn't go through all the processes of getting ready for him to
die the way that maybe you would if you were certain that this was it.
So at this point in the Tail Street, he tells us, well,
they had to finish the game.
I mean they'd invested an enormous amount of time and heart and talent in
building this game. But now the facts have changed. Yeah,
it started as a game that was supposed to be about the experience of fighting
cancer but also the experience of triumphing over cancer but can't be that game
anymore. So like what do you do as game designers, as parents,
how do you finish a game where you don't have many choices and you can't win for
this part? As we were talking with street t, I mean it's so visual. Mm. Uh,
she just sat down and walked us through as descriptively as she could.
How Ryan and Amy Particularly Ryan tried to solve this design problem.
The end of the game, they weren't sure,
but it was basically going to be a two part scene where there's the moment of
his death. Yeah. And they weren't sure how to do that,
but there's a moment of his death and right after that,
a moment where he goes to happen,
essentially there was this little island and so Ryan sets about making the scene
of his death. It starts off pretty simple. If it's in a hospital,
there's little Joel sitting on a green chair and there are some tubes of this
neon fluid feeding into him. And there's, um,
these pipes that rise up above him,
which are like pipe organ pipes and there was a little bit of game play where
you can play the pipe organ anyway. And then, and then after that he said,
well this isn't, this isn't enough. This is the where
my son dies. And so it must be just like epic.
And so he creates this almost European style,
like oversized cathedral where, you know,
the walls are soaring up and the ceilings are intercut and contain all of these
different, um, um, like body, like the,
it's almost as if he's coding Joel's body into the architecture. So he has,
you know,
pieces that look like ribs and there's this part that looks like his heart.
I can show you guys these pictures. It's, so, I'm trying to think,
how are you doing on your laptop to the glass? Yeah, this is, so just quickly,
I want to show you that this is, yeah. So that's, that's amazing, right?
That's amazing.
He's so pretty. I was not prepared for the beauty of this.
It's very intricate.
Interlacing arches light cascading down.
That's the catacombs and stained glass,
these very ornate ceilings. Um,
and so we start to building that and it's beautiful and it just gets bigger and
bigger. And then suddenly he feels like, you know, this is too light.
And so then the cathedral becomes a place of darkness and all the lights are
neon. Oh, so no, it's very dope. There's trees growing into the cathedral now.
That's the cancer. Huh? And then he's in this space and he's like,
so what should people be able to do in this space? We have all this, you know,
these tubes and things for, for Chemo.
I want to put in the machines that were keeping Joel alive.
So we were feeding him, uh, with these nutrition ivy things.
We had these oxygen tanks and so he starts building actual equipment that the
user would have to like fiddle with the levers and you know,
make things just right. So that,
that Joel's getting what he needs to stay alive. But then he thinks,
oh well if they do it wrong, then they'll feel as if Joel died because of them.
And that's terrible. And so then he says, you know what, scrap this whole thing.
Shoot. They showed us maybe 60 different sketches,
a different iterations of the cathedral that were all super detailed in a kind
of Terry Gilliam on steroids sort of way. Like for instance,
there was one sketch where Ryan had, had, had,
had built an entire amusement park in the cathedral and that was supposed to
represent all of Jill's favorite things. And then he's like, wait,
but now it's all, there's just like too much stuff. It's distracting.
So then he takes out the whole amusement park and then he puts in these prayer
candles
[inaudible]
cause he's like, you know,
really what I want people to take away is this feeling I had on the last night
of Joel's life where all you can do now is pray. Um,
and so you light one of these candles and you hear a prayer from that night.
Lord, my God,
with this Holly's life returned to him and let you go.
Awesome. And it's been hard I think for both of us to get to a place where we,
it can't say all the things,
the cathedral can't say all the things we want it to say.
Just have to cut something else and that game cause we couldn't finish it.
And it's hard cause you just want to never finish it and make it as beautiful as
possible. And I don't know,
like there's a part of me that feels like we betray the project by finishing it
and by saying it can only be so much, but of course they have to finish it.
There's investors, there's a release date.
What's disappointing to me is how quickly it fades.
Joel, how, how the memories and the,
that person of Joel Fades because he's not here. He's uh,
he becomes more and more an idea. This,
this game is not him. It's just an echo of him. It's not,
it's not even the best echo of him.
I think that's the thing that I'm struggling with as we've,
as we're approaching the end of this, like what did we do? What did we,
what did we do all this for a while. Why is it that, why did we do this?
[inaudible]
the game is coming out mid January.
The Cathedral to Ryan will always be,
I'm finished. Can you show me the last scene with the pancakes? Sure.
Yeah.
Ryan was able to finish the place that comes right after the cathedral.
It's the scene where you say goodbye to Joel.
You find yourself in a boat next to Joel. There's no oars.
You're headed towards an island.
You get there,
you walk along a small path and you end up in a clearing in the woods.
There's a picnic blanket and Joel sitting on it.
Alli member, you here.
I love it. Yeah, I bet.
Woo.
And around him are all the things he loved the most.
[inaudible] a huge stack of pancakes way, way bigger than him.
A little dog.
I always run it and now I got one
and bubbles. You can blow him bubbles.
Bad luck.
So babbles
like I can catch one.
[inaudible]
okay. Okay, Joe,
I love that Bible
having made a in the case
fair
and you just keep going. Bibles,
so babbles
and at some point like I can catch one
[inaudible] you just walk away.
[inaudible]
made you catch a Babbo.
I love my Bible.
[inaudible]
it's like, wow, that's the choice you get in the end. At the end of this game,
stop until you're ready to walk away. It's not much of a choice.
No. Very big thanks to Sruthi peanut,
the many and the whole team apply all PJ Vogt, Alex Goldman, tinned,
uh, our former producer Tim Howard back then. Tim, how you doing via Bennon,
Khalila Holt, Peter Clowney,
my first editor and Rick Kwon and definitely go check out reply all.
You can find them@gimletmedia.com. Gimlet, g. I. M. L. E. T.
Their self is so fun. It's such a fun show to do it.
We were on a onstage with them in a,
in a thing and we thought we were, you know, good.
We thought we were good and they were so much better than us.
They were so much better than that. They had this such a good story.
I think it actually might be coming up in their stream next week. Maybe, yeah,
you want to check it out.
It's about a woman who shoots everybody every night over years and years,
over and over, and she's like, well, I wonder, we won't be out.
You just don't say the right. Also,
thanks to David [inaudible] and to Mullica Zu, Holly whorl,
who made a documentary also about Ryan and Amy, they called theirs.
Thank you for playing. I saw it. It's pretty good and a thank you for listening.
I'm Jen Abu Ron. I remember college. We'll see you next time.